Aid agencies are warning of an
increasing risk of famine in Gaza with
more than 90% of the population now
deemed to be at least at a crisis level
now that's the third phase of the ipc's
global food and security scale with
phase five classified as famine that
level is already being experienced by a
quarter of the population in Northern
Gaza the others there also fall into
emergency or crisis levels of food
insecurity 15% of internally displaced
people in Gaza are already and famine
nearly half are estimated to be
experiencing emergency levels of hunger
huge amounts now in the South 15% of
people are living in stressed levels of
food insecurity that's the second phase
on the scale the rest are experiencing
crisis emergency or famine levels of
hunger well let's bring in Michael faky
he's the UN special rapporter on the
right to food and a professor of law at
Oregon University he joins us now from
Eugene in Oregon Michael this word
famine it's obviously a technical term
it has very specific connotations so a
certain proportion of children for
instance need to be dying in order for
it to be used we know that that is now
happening in parts of Gaza but I wonder
if if a technical threshold like this
can be a bit of a distraction I mean
this is a graded scale right the level
of starvation below famine is still
profound thank you Nastasia no I think
you're quite right in terms of of course
there's a technical definition it
measures the number of people affected
uh about one it looks for one out of
three children uh being acutely
malnourished um but ultimately what
famine means is an a significant
increase of rate of people dying from
hunger and
malnutrition and the challenge is how do
you measure that in the midst of a war
yeah so what we're hearing is yes
there's a significant risk of famine but
now I'm wondering are we actually in a
famine it's unclear so what is clear is
that all children under the age of five
in Gaza so that's 335 children
are not getting enough nutrition that
means they're all at the risk of
permanent physical and cognitive
impairment what doctors call stunting
their future is at
stake Michael I want to talk about the
speed and the scale of this we keep
hearing the word unprecedented but I
wonder if you can help us put this in
context there have been famines declared
in places like Somalia Yemen Ethiopia
that got a lot of publicity how does
this
compare right and I'm always careful not
to compare different famines every
catastrophe and every atrocity is its
own has its own Dynamic the what's
what's unique about this one has been
the speed and how complete we've never
seen 2.2 million civilians made to go
hungry within weeks so we've never seen
this degree of hunger used as a weapon
so quickly and so completely uh uh ever
Michael you you said it's being used as
a weapon so the pattern of Israeli
attack
the borrowing of food Aid in your mind
that tells us about the intent
here well exactly to understand how did
this happen so quickly it doesn't happen
by chance starvation wherever it happens
is always the result of political
choices and this is the same case here
so first Israel declared a Siege on
October 9th and immediately imple
implemented a Siege now which meant they
blocked all food water fuel and medicine
to civilians now we're seeing a ickle of
humanitarian relief make its way in but
what we're hearing from un agencies is
that uh humanitarian relief is not
reaching most of Gaza so it's not enough
so the current Siege is one cause but
this is also an ongoing problem there
was a 16year blockade before this so
even before the war half of people in
Gaza were food insecure and 80% depended
on Aid so already Israel made the
situation precarious through um through
a blockade then it imposes a Siege
during the war then it destroys civilian
infrastructure so Israel has destroyed
hospitals homes roads um making everyday
life impossible and finally what I'm
receiving reports is the destruction of
the food system itself meaning Israel
has destroyed approximately 22% of
agricultural land it's destroyed 70% of
fishing boats and has denied Fishers
access to the Sea so even if uh Gaz
gazin wanted to feed themselves Israel
is destroying their food system so you
put all of these combined this is why we
we're seeing this risk of famine happen
so quickly Michael from what you're were
saying it sounds like you believe that
this is systematic we've also seen the
destruction of farms and attacks on
farmers in the occupied West Bank what
in your mind is Israel's aim
here I mean their declared aim has been
to push out Palestinians out of Gaza
they've said as much in in black and
white terms they've used dehumanizing
language they've called the Palestinian
people animals and they've targeted
civilians simply because they're
Palestinian um so and their aim is again
from what we keep hearing and in black
and white terms this is not reading
between the line lines it sounds like to
occupy Gaza even more and to push out
Palestinians as much as possible Michael
you are the UN special rapporter on the
right to food
what can the UN do right now other than
ask Israel to let more food
in I mean through formal channels we've
seen everything we've seen the security
Council we've seen the Secretary General
we've seen the general assembly we've
yet to hear from the Human Rights
Council before we turn to the UN I think
people on the streets have the answer
millions of people are Marching In the
Streets demanding an end to the war and
immediate humanitarian relief it's now
time for the governments to work
together through the US
and to put real pressure on Israel its
allies have done nothing to prevent this
this risk of famine and this risk of
genocide so now it's time for people to
continue pressuring their governments
and for governments to economically
pressure Israel to diplomatically
pressure Israel and politically pressure
Israel to stop uh um uh this famine
we've spoken a lot here Michael about
intent as many Aid agencies have pointed
out the use of starvation as a weapon of
war is a war crime so what sort of
accountability can there be will there
be I to call it a war crime in legal
terms what that means is to we can try
and hold individuals accountable through
international criminal courts through
International court of justice through
National courts the problem of focusing
on International laws of war is it's
often after the fact after the fighting
ends and it goes after individuals and
it still allows the laws of war still
allow for killing of people and Israel
will make the argument that it is out of
military necessity that it is starving
people and that's a legal argument it's
allowed to make now time will tell
whether that is factually true or not um
but I think what's actually more
important to frame it back as a human
rights concern there's a risk of
genocide and we've seen genocide
actually unfolding and there's no
exception to genocide there's no
exception to targeting and killing
Palestinians simply because they're
Palestinian Michael fakri there the UN
special rapporter on the right to food
thank you so much for joining us on Al
jaer
sir thank you very much